CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY TRENDS
TO WATCH OUT FOR
April 13, 2018
Keeping a close eye on current trends in the construction industry is indispensable for builders and contractors to stay ahead of the curve. Technological advancements have brought a new wave of applications and modernized the old processes. The construction industry is moving toward green buildings, utilization of building information modeling, Implementation of AR & VR, and development of modular homes.

Following are some of the trends that construction companies in India need to look out for:

Green Buildings:
The rise in environmental awareness among consumers has shifted their buying preferences. The change in consumer preferences led contractors and engineers to emphasize designing eco-friendly homes, use sustainable building materials, and avail certification of Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). The top construction companies in India have been increasingly participating in LEED programs. Acquiring its certification provides construction projects with a global symbol of sustainability. According to the report from The US Green Building Council (USGBC), the green building industry in India is expected to grow by 20 percent in 2018, owing to government regulations regarding the reduction of greenhouse emissions and an increase in awareness among consumers about the benefits of green buildings. Nearly 1,990 projects are part of the LEED program in India. The USGBC’s study also observed that the cost of constructing green buildings is less than that of conventional buildings. Though this trend has been around for the past few years in the construction industry, it will progress rapidly this year.

Building Information Modeling (BIM):
BIM creates a collaborative work environment among designers, engineers, suppliers, builders, and customers through 3D models. This leads to the development of efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable solutions. The elimination of errors in the early stages of design can avoid last-minute changes. This reduces overall construction costs and improves safety. According to the annual NBS National BIM report, 78% of the manufacturers believe that the future of the construction industry lies in BIM. Engineers and contractors in Pune, India have been instrumental in acquiring knowledge about the effective utilization of BIM. This has helped them to review the complexities and risks involved in construction and enhance operational safety. The progress in technology has now enabled the creation of a collaborative environment through 6D models too.

Implementation of VR & AR:
Virtual reality (VR) models help engineers, designers, builders, and contractors to visualize structures, eliminating dependability on conventional scaled-up models. The precision in VR mapping is another benefit that cannot be achieved with physical models. VR also helps contractors to work in collaboration with clients. The ‘try before you buy’ notion is gaining prominence across the construction sector. VR headsets enable both of them to visualize the proposed layout, discuss changes, and move forward with a well-thought-out plan.

Construction companies in Pune have adopted a unique approach: merging virtual reality with augmented reality (AR). AR can offer accurate measurements, reduce risks, and provide precise material details. The laser tripod scanners have been replaced and templates for VR models have been created in real time. The utilization of VR and AR is still in its infancy and its use will be widespread in coming years. Along with merging AR and VR, the construction industry is keen to deploy drones to inspect remote locations, collect information, track project progress, and determine safety measures.

Development of modular homes:
Modular homes are constructed off-site and transported to the original construction site without compromising quality. They have gained a huge prominence in past few years, particularly at remote locations and suburban areas. Builders have preferred modular construction as they can start working off-site once all the permits are availed. Moreover, construction of modular buildings is cheaper, faster, and more efficient than on-site construction. Some of the modular designs can be disassembled and transported at any time. According to Westchester Modular report, modular construction projects complete 65 times faster than on-site construction projects. This is a new concept in the industry and builders facing declining profits have preferred this method to lower construction costs of new projects.

These are some of the major trends to watch out for. Millennials have been eagerly finding innovative ways to use technology in the construction industry. Builders, contractors, engineers, and suppliers need to monitor innovations and modernize their projects to achieve optimum efficiency and profitability.